= Background =

=== Why Build This? ===

Why design a solar monitoring system? Indeed, such products are already on the market. The problem with existing solar monitoring systems is that they are limited in their application, are expensive, and require paying a third party for services. My contention is that this sort of system can and should be built using non-custom hardware and open-source software that can run anywhere. 

One of the primary applications I would like to see this system extend to are rural power systems around the world. In places where the existing power grid is limited, such as Sub-Saharan Africa, an open-source monitoring system could well serve as an invaluable tool in the maintenance of solar power systems. This is not a trivial point. One of the biggest problems with stand-alone solar power systems is that they require a fair amount of discipline to maintain, including some specific knowledge of electrical systems and the nature of battery banks. And, unsurprisingly, this sort of knowledge is not always easy to come by. 

This system is not intended as a replacement for such knowledge, nor should anyone expect it to be. But why is there a knowledge gap in the first place? How could a solar power system exist in a place where its main stakeholders are poorly informed on such matters as its operation and maintenance? In many cases, particularly in Africa, the answer is simple: International charity organizations install them and then leave. 

=== A Brief Historical Aside ===

It's a fairly common exercise in the world of humanitarian assistance for a charity organization to, in a feat of self-proclaimed heroics, set up a solar array for a school or hospital in a small town to power lights, computers, and potentially other equipment. Such efforts are well and good, provided a sustainable plan is in place to maintain the system after the initial effort is complete. Otherwise, what good is a power system that breaks down after a few weeks of unintended misuse?

A short anecdote will make this point clearer. I once had the opportunity to visit a health clinic in a small town called Sanyang in The Gambia. A Belgian charity organization had been good enough to set up a professional quality solar-powered water pump to provide the clinic with running water. Sadly, the pump wasn't working anymore. The reason? The organization that built it didn't bother to transfer any knowledge to the local community on how to operate the system. Eventually the pump broke down in expected fashion and the clinic was left without running water. It was precisely the worst kind of photo-op charity project, a solar water pump that nobody knew how to use. And, indeed, how could anyone? Where would one obtain information and training on the maintenance of the specific equipment used? To me, this epitomizes the short-sightedness of so many similar humanitarian projects. All too often, a lack of knowledge transfer, a failure to consider issues of sustainability, and a failure to follow up on the project after completion result in situations like the Sanyang health clinic. 

For more information on issues of humanitarian projects and their shortcomings, I have posted a research paper on this very topic. Please [http://code.google.com/p/solar-monitoring-project/downloads/detail?name=Renewable%20Energy%20in%20Africa.pdf&can=2&q=#makechanges read about it here], or you're just taking my word for it.

=== A Word of Caution and Further Justifications ===

The gap between implementation and sustainability needs to be closed. In any situation where solar technology is introduced as part of a development project, there must be a transfer of knowledge on matters of its operation and maintenance to local stakeholders. For the purposes of this project, I am assuming this to be the de facto standard. Let me be clear: The system I have proposed here is of *no use* if there are not dedicated persons assigned to the task of overseeing a given solar power system. With that in mind, I'll continue...

One of the curious side-effects of the expansion of cellular technology around the world is the fact that in a lot of developing countries there are large populations with access to a cellular network but not standard electrical grid power. (In essence, this means you can use a cell phone in a lot of places where you couldn't theoretically charge it.) Thus, a monitoring system relying on the use of cellular communication to relay diagnostic information actually makes a great deal of sense. 